[WIP] Server-side Editor API guide (#18544)
ckeditor/ckeditor5: docs/framework/server-side-editor-api.md

- **AI-powered Editing**: Make automated suggestions while users are actively editing, helping improve content quality
- **Automated Revision Control**: Track and manage document versions automatically, perfect for maintaining content history and audit trails
- **Automated Publishing**: Prepare and process content for publication, including formatting, metadata updates, and resolving comments
- **Custom Integration**: Connect the editor with your existing systems and workflows, such as CMS or document management systems
- **Automatic Checkpoints**: Create automatic checkpoints in your document

## Getting Started with Server-Side Editor API

This guide shows you how to write scripts that can be executed through the Server-Side Editor API endpoint. The following sections provide examples of such scripts, each demonstrating a specific use case that can be automated on the server side.

For information about setting up and using the endpoint itself, see the {TODO: link Cloud Services Server-side Editor API} documentation.

## Working with Content

> ### Simple Text Changes

Reviewer: I wonder if this shouldn't start from getting the data:

```js
return editor.getData();
```

It's not particularly useful on its own, and there's a separate REST API to get the editor data. But this way you can use `getData()` options like `showSuggestionHighlights: true`, which may be useful (e.g. for PDF export). It also teaches you how to return the data from the endpoint. Of course this is shown in further scripts, but it's nice to start with it.

If you can come up with any sensible example, you could also show that you could post-process the data taken from the editor:

```js
const data = editor.getData();

// do something with `data`

return data;
```

Or you can show that you can return information related to the document data, but not the document data itself. E.g. you can read words count from word count plugin.

Here's a simple example. Imagine you're working on a document and need to change every instance of "entirely" to "completely". Instead of doing it manually, you can do it with one line of code:

```js
// Replace all instances of "entirely" with "completely" in the document.
editor.execute( 'replaceAll', 'completely', 'entirely' );
```

> This one line will:
> - Find all instances of "entirely" in your document
> - Change each one to "completely"
> - Keep all the formatting around the changed text
> 
> This is perfect for fixing typos, updating old terms, or making any bulk changes to your documents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This one line will find all instances of "entirely" in your document and change them to "completely". This is perfect for making bulk updates in multiple documents. Simply, execute this call for every document you would like to change.
```

Reviewer: IDK if we have a list of all commands in the API, but if we do, it'd be nice to link to it.

Author: I can't find a complete list of commands. The only way to view them seems to be through the "Subclasses" section in the right panel of the API docs:
![Zrzut ekranu 2025-05-29 o 13 15 31](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cdbc7196-d0b4-4498-b9b0-ad3f75507258)

However, I'll add a link to https://ckeditor.com/docs/ckeditor5/latest/framework/architecture/core-editor-architecture.html#commands.

### Updating Links in Your Document

Now, consider a more complex scenario. You need to update all links in your document from `/docs/` to `/documents/`. This is a common task when moving content between environments or updating your site structure.

```js
// Get the root element and create a range that covers all content.
const root = editor.model.document.getRoot();
const range = editor.model.createRangeIn( root );
const items = Array.from( range.getItems() );

// Use model.change to ensure proper undo/redo support.
editor.model.change( writer => {
    for ( const item of items ) {
        let href = item.getAttribute( 'linkHref' );

        if ( item.is( 'textProxy' ) && href ) {
            // Update the link URL.
            href = href.replace( '/docs/', '/documents/' );
            writer.setAttribute( 'linkHref', href, item );
        }
    }
} );
```

This approach is particularly useful when you need to:
- Update many links at once
- Fix broken links across your content

> - Change link patterns in bulk

Reviewer: Following my previous suggestions, I think that here I'd link to some guide in framework to learn API basics? Or just not write anything at all.

> ### Adding Complex HTML Content

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Insert HTML Content
```

Let's say you need to add a pre-made section to your document. This is useful when you want to add templates, import content from other systems, or create dynamic content.

```js
// The HTML content we want to add.
const html = '<h2>New section</h2><p>This is a <strong>new section</strong> inserted into the document using <u>server-side editor API</u>.</p>';

// Convert HTML to the editor's model.
const model = editor.data.parse( html );

// Get the root element and create an insertion position.
const root = editor.model.document.getRoot();
const insertPosition = editor.model.createPositionAt( root, 1 );

// Insert the content at the specified position.
editor.model.insertContent( model, insertPosition );
```

This is perfect for:
- Adding content from other places
- Inserting ready-made templates

> - Adding pre-formatted HTML content 

Reviewer: Change into one line :) it's the same thing written in three ways.

Author: Removed. I think my new description above the snipper is sufficient.

## Working with Track Changes

> {@link features/track-changes Track changes} helps you manage content suggestions effectively, for tasks like automating content review, and implementing AI-powered suggestions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can leverage {@link features/track-changes Track changes} feature API to manage existing content suggestions, retrieve final document data with all suggestions accepted, or implement automated or AI-powered content review process.
```

Reviewer: Please add the example with track changes data even though it doesn't work. We **must** have it working, it's one of the main use cases customers required.

### Text Modifications

> Let's start with a basic text replacement:

Reviewer: To align with previous snippets, I'd also add snippet with inserting HTML content.

```js
// Enable track changes to mark our edits as suggestions.
editor.execute( 'trackChanges' );

// Make a simple text replacement.
editor.execute( 'replaceAll', 'I', 'you' );
```

The `trackChanges` command ensures that all changes are marked as suggestions, making it easy for others to review and accept or reject them.

> ### Content Structure Changes

Reviewer: I wouldn't call it content structure changes. Content structure sounds more like splitting content into blocks, adding headings, using lists and tables, etc.

Author: I proposed a new title, which is "Content changes".

editor.model.deleteContent( deleteSelection );
```

This pattern is essential when building automated content review systems. You might use it to flag outdated sections, remove deprecated content, or clean up documents before publication. The API gives you precise control over what gets removed and how the changes are tracked.

Similarly, you can suggest adding new content:

```js
// Enable track changes for the new content.
editor.execute( 'trackChanges' );

// Prepare the new content we want to add.
const modelFragment = editor.data.parse( 'Hello <strong>world!</strong>' );

// Add the content as a suggestion at the beginning of the document.
const firstElement = editor.model.document.getRoot().getChild( 0 );
const insertPosition = editor.model.createPositionAt( firstElement, 0 );

editor.model.insertContent( modelFragment, insertPosition );
```

This approach shines in several real-world scenarios:
- Automatically suggesting content updates based on external data
- Creating templates that need review before finalization
- Integrating with content management systems to propose changes
- Building custom workflows for content creation and review

### Attribute Modifications

> Sometimes you need more advanced control over how your changes are recorded, especially when working with attributes. Let's look at how to suggest attribute changes, like updating link URLs:

Reviewer: I don't like that this description sounds like it is about some generic changes recording, while in reality we are discussing the attribute use case only.

```suggestion
Inserting and deleting content is integrated with track changes, so you can easily use `model.insertContent()` and `model.deleteContent()` as described above.

However, if you wish to create attributes suggestions using the editor model API, you need to specifically tell track changes features to record these changes. Let's look how to correctly make a suggestion to update links URLs:
```

```js
// Get the track changes editing plugin for direct access to suggestion recording.
const tcEditing = editor.plugins.get( 'TrackChangesEditing' );

// Get the root element and create a range that covers all content.
const root = editor.model.document.getRoot();
const range = editor.model.createRangeIn( root );
const items = Array.from( range.getItems() );

// Process each item in the document.
for ( const item of items ) {
    editor.model.change( writer => {
        // Use _recordAttributeChanges to ensure the change is properly recorded as a suggestion.
        tcEditing._recordAttributeChanges( () => {
            let href = item.getAttribute( 'linkHref' );

            // Only process text proxies (parts of text nodes) that have a `linkHref` attribute.
            if ( item.is( 'textProxy' ) && href ) {
                // Update the link URL, for example changing '/docs/' to '/documents/'.
                href = href.replace( '/docs/', '/documents/' );

                // Set the new attribute value, which will be recorded as a suggestion.
                writer.setAttribute( 'linkHref', href, item );
            }
        } );
    } );
}
```

## Resolving Comments

> {@link features/comments Comments} help you track discussions in your documents. Here's how to get them and automatically resolve them:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{@link features/comments Comments} feature allows your users to have discussions on certain parts of your documents. You can use Comments feature API to implement interactions with comments with no need to open the editor itself.

For example, here's how to resolve all comment threads in a given document:
```

```js
// Get all comment threads from the document.
const threads = editor.plugins.get( 'CommentsRepository' ).getCommentThreads();

// Resolve all open comment threads.
for ( const thread of threads ) {
    if ( !thread.isResolved ) {
        thread.resolve();
    }
}
```

This code is particularly useful when you need to clean up a document before finalizing it. You might use it to automatically resolve old discussions, prepare documents for publication, or maintain a clean comment history in your content management system.

> ## Working with Revision History
> 
> ### Basic Revision Management
> 
> Here's how to work with the basics of {@link features/revision-history revision history}. When you make changes, you can save them as a new revision:
> 
> ```js
> // Make some changes to the document.
> editor.execute( 'replaceAll', 'I', 'you' );
> 
> // Save the current state as a new revision.
> editor.plugins.get( 'RevisionTracker' ).saveRevision( { name: 'New revision' } );
> ```
> 
> This approach is essential for maintaining a clear history of your document's evolution. It's particularly useful when you need to create checkpoints in your work or maintain an audit trail of content modifications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Working with Revision History

Use {@link features/revision-history Revision history} feature API to build more functional integration between your application and the document revisions data.

### Saving revisions

You can use Revision history API to save a new revision directly from your application back-end:

```js
// Save the current state as a new revision.
editor.plugins.get( 'RevisionTracker' ).saveRevision( { name: 'New revision' } );
```

This can be used after you performed some changes to the document to save them as a new revision.

You can also build an automated mechanism that will automatically create revisions in some time intervals, or based on other factors. It can be particularly useful when you need to create checkpoints for your documents to maintain an audit trail of content modifications.
```

> This approach is essential for maintaining a clear history of your document's evolution. It's particularly useful when you need to create checkpoints in your work or maintain an audit trail of content modifications.

Reviewer: Unfortunately GH does not allow me to make a suggestion with "```js" inside, so I am pasting it like this:

## Working with Revision History

Use {@link features/revision-history Revision history} feature API to build more functional integration between your application and the document revisions data.

### Saving revisions

You can use Revision history API to save a new revision directly from your application back-end:

```js
// Save the current state as a new revision.
editor.plugins.get( 'RevisionTracker' ).saveRevision( { name: 'New revision' } );
```

This can be used after you performed some changes to the document to save them as a new revision.

You can also build an automated mechanism that will automatically create revisions in some time intervals, or based on other factors. It can be particularly useful when you need to create checkpoints for your documents to maintain an audit trail of content modifications.

### Working with Revision Data

For more advanced scenarios, you might need to work with different revisions of your document:

```js
// Get the revision management tools.
const revisionHistory = editor.plugins.get( 'RevisionHistory' );
const revisionTracker = editor.plugins.get( 'RevisionTracker' );

// Get the first revision from history.
const revision = revisionHistory.getRevisions()[ 0 ];

// Get the content and attributes of the revision.
const documentData = await revisionTracker.getRevisionDocumentData( revision );
const attributes = await revisionTracker.getRevisionRootsAttributes( revision );

return { documentData, attributes };
```

This is useful when you want to:
- Compare revisions
- Export them
- Build your own features
- Retrieve and process document data of a given revision
- Restore revisions server-side, possibly across multiple documents

> - Integrate revision data with external systems

Reviewer: I removed part about restoring revisions as we'll have a separate snippet for it.

---
category: framework
order: 500
meta-title: Server-Side Editor API | CKEditor 5 Documentation
modified_at: 2025-05-20
---

# Server-side editor API

Server-Side Editor API allows for deep and complex integration of your application with document data, enabling you to manipulate content and manage collaborative data such as suggestions, comments, and revision history directly from your server-side code.

## Why use server-side editor API?

While CKEditor 5 provides a rich client-side editing experience, there are many scenarios where server-side content processing is essential:

* **Security**: Process sensitive content in a controlled environment without exposing it to client-side manipulation.
* **Performance**: Handle large-scale content operations without impacting the user's browser.
* **Consistency**: Ensure uniform content changes across multiple documents.
* **Integration**: Connect with other server-side systems and databases directly.
* **Automation**: Run content processing tasks as part of your server workflows.
* **Scalability**: Process multiple documents simultaneously without client-side limitations.

> ## Common use cases

Reviewer: This section feels a bit too long to me. We already covered it partially in previous sections (although in different words). And then the next sections are more useful and still present various common use cases.

I wonder if this section is needed at all, but it can be a good introduction, just don't keep the reader for too long from the "meat". Maybe choose 5 points from these proposed here?

Author: Okay, I removed:
* Bulk content updates - demonstrated later in the "Using commands" section.
* Dynamic content - overlaps with automation.
* Automated revision control - covered in "Working with revision history" section.
* Custom integration - too generic.
* Automatic checkpoints - too specific.

Let me know if you want to change something here.

## Working with revision history

Use {@link features/revision-history Revision history} feature API to build more functional integration between your application and the document revisions data.

### Saving revisions

You can use Revision History API to save a new revision directly from your application back-end:

```js
// Save the current state as a new revision.
editor.plugins.get( 'RevisionTracker' ).saveRevision( { name: 'New revision' } );
```

This can be used after you performed some changes to the document to save them as a new revision.

You can also build an automated mechanism that will automatically create revisions in some time intervals, or based on other factors. It can be particularly useful when you need to create checkpoints for your documents to maintain an audit trail of content modifications.

### Working with revision data

For more advanced scenarios, you might need to work with different revisions of your document:

```js
// Get the revision management tools.
const revisionHistory = editor.plugins.get( 'RevisionHistory' );
const revisionTracker = editor.plugins.get( 'RevisionTracker' );

// Get the first revision from history.

> const revision = revisionHistory.getRevisions()[ 0 ];

Reviewer: Make sure it is `.getRevisions()[ 0 ]` not `.getRevisions( 0 )`. AFAIR they both return a different value 🤦.

Also, instead of using "first", let's use "oldest" or "latest". "First" is ambiguous -- first created, or first on the list?

> // Get the content and attributes of the revision.

Reviewer: These are not revision attributes but roots/documents attributes.

```suggestion
// Get the document content and document roots attributes.
```

Most features do not use attributes though, so I am always hesitant whether we should include them in the snippet. But it's more future-proof for sure.

const documentData = await revisionTracker.getRevisionDocumentData( revision );
const attributes = await revisionTracker.getRevisionRootsAttributes( revision );

return { documentData, attributes };
```

This is useful if you need particular revision data for further processing. It will allow you build custom back-end features based on revisions, like previewing revisions data outside of editor, exporting a particular revision to PDF, or integrating revisions data with external systems.

## Custom plugins

> Server-side editor API capabilities could be extended by creating custom plugins. They provide a way to implement complex logic and maintain reusable functionality across multiple server-side operations. Through the editor instance, you can access their API in your server-side scripts, making your code more organized and maintainable. This approach is especially recommended for complex operations that would be cumbersome to implement directly in the server-side script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Server-side editor API capabilities could be extended by creating custom plugins. Custom plugins may implement complex logic and maintain reusable functionality across multiple server-side operations. Through the editor instance, you can access custom plugin API in your server-side scripts. This approach will make your code more organized and maintainable. It is especially recommended for complex operations that would be cumbersome to implement directly in the server-side script.

To use custom plugins in server-side executed scripts, simply add them to the editor bundle that you upload to Cloud Services.
```

Reviewer: We could add some dummy script like

```js
const myPlugin = editor.plugins.get( 'MyCustomPlugin' );

return myPlugin.doSomething();
```

---

> category: framework

Reviewer 2: After you bump to newest `stable`:

category: cloud-services
order: 30
